Create cancer_data_management.md (#1515)
elixir-europe/rdmkit: pages/your_domain/cancer_data_management.md

Key challenges include integrating diverse datasets and ensuring data accuracy since the screening programs could be organised on national or regional level. Additionally, the risks and benefits of screening programs must be balanced.

#### Considerations

* The data access procedure could be different for different data sources. Be mindful to contact the relevant data creators and managers for the relevant access rights.
* Interoperability of data originating from multiple screening programs is not guaranteed.
* For general health data considerations, see [Health data page](health_data).
* For general bioimaging data considerations, see [bioImaging data page](bioimaging_data).

#### Solutions

> As there are no commonly accepted data collection standards currently, EOSC4Cancer developed a harmonised codebook for colorectal cancer screening (based on Dutch, Catalan, Italian and Czech screening codebooks), which could be used as a common basis to be extended to other cancer types.

Reviewer: There needs to be a link for the "code book" here which is yet to be published , so no link yet. I can add the generic EOSC4Cancer link but I don't think we need a explanation for EOSC4Cancer, link should be enough.

* Implement version-controlled patient records using [EHR](health_data) systems that support updates based on evolving classification standards and cancer-specific coding dictionaries for diagnosis (e.g., {% tool "icd-o-3" %} or {% tool "snomed-ct" %} for cancer diagnosis and topography, AJCC/UICC {% tool "tnm" %} staging system, {% tool "who-tc" %}).
* Utilize secure repositories and specialized cancer clinical data management systems (e.g., {% tool "redcap" %}, {% tool "i2b2" %}, {% tool "cbioportal" %}) that comply with GDPR, [HIPAA](https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/security/laws-regulations/index.html), and other regulatory frameworks.
* Implement standardized consent forms and patient data governance frameworks, such as GA4GH's {% tool "data-use-ontology" %}, to allow data sharing while maintaining privacy.
* Store raw sequencing and imaging data in cloud-based or institutional repositories (e.g., EGA, dbGAP, SRA, TCIA for imaging) to allow reanalysis when new prognostic markers emerge.

> * Adopt federated learning approaches (e.g., {% tool "fega" %}, Federated EHR Learning Models) to enable collaborative research without transferring sensitive patient data.

Reviewer: > In what sense is FEGA a "learning approach"? I am a bit confused

This I'll have to clarify with the authors.

* Integrate AI-based imaging tools (e.g., {% tool "path-ai" %}, {% tool "qure-ai" %}, {% tool "paige-ai" %}) for radiology and pathology analysis to assist in detecting subtle cancer features and ensure adherence to standards (e.g., {% tool "dome" %}, {% tool "tripod" %}), avoiding biases in cancer diagnosis.

## Cancer treatment

### Description

> Cancer treatment varies depending on the type and stage of cancer (e.g. locally advanced, metastatic disease), as well as the overall health and preferences of the patient. The use of advanced diagnostic techniques (e.g. PET-CT/MRI, molecular profiling (e.g. next-generation sequencing, comprehensive genomic profiling (CGP), whole genome sequencing (WGS)) and liquid biopsies (e.g. ctDNA)) has tremendously increased the data density and complexity to be dealt with at this stage of disease.

Reviewer 2: Nested brackets are a bit too much here. Consider using a "such as" without opening the bracket.

> Cancer treatment employs a wide range of data types, such as patients' therapeutic regimens, including surgery techniques, stem cell transplantation, radiotherapy, systemic therapies (e.g., hormone, chemotherapy, immunotherapy and targeted therapies) as well as  imaging data, biomarker assessments, responses to therapies data, clinical trial outcomes, drug efficacy, and adverse reactions. Cancer treatment data is commonly associated with further clinical data and patients' information. Due to their sensitive nature, the data must be managed following ethical guidelines, data protection laws, and FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable) principles.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Cancer treatment employs a wide range of data types, such as patients' therapeutic regimens, including surgery techniques, stem cell transplantation, radiotherapy, systemic therapies (e.g. hormone, chemotherapy, immunotherapy, and targeted therapies) as well as imaging data, biomarker assessments, responses to therapies data, clinical trial outcomes, drug efficacy, and adverse reactions. Cancer treatment data is commonly associated with further clinical data and patients' information. Due to their sensitive nature, the data must be managed following ethical guidelines, data protection laws, and FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable) principles.
```

> Although cancer treatment data is crucial for developing personalized medicine approaches, improving patient outcomes and advancing research, comprehensive documentation of cancer treatment data remains limited in cancer registries and public datasets. This challenge is often due to data privacy regulations, ethical concerns, and varying reporting standards, which highlight disparities arising from resource limitations, national database structures, and language barriers. In addition, while cancer treatment data publication has increased, it remains inconsistent due to the lack of data standardization along with sparse ontologies. The increasing use of electronic health records across western countries, along with standardized cancer classification systems (e.g., WHO, ICD, CAP), staging systems (e.g., TNM, AJCC), and pioneering drug (e.g., DRON PDRO) and side effects (e.g., OAE) ontologies, facilitates data collection. However, clear guidelines for cancer treatment data collection and tools for unified analysis still need to be developed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Although cancer treatment data is crucial for developing personalised medicine approaches, improving patient outcomes and advancing research, comprehensive documentation of cancer treatment data remains limited in cancer registries and public datasets. This challenge is often due to data privacy regulations, ethical concerns, and varying reporting standards, which highlight disparities arising from resource limitations, national database structures, and language barriers. In addition, while cancer treatment data publication has increased, it remains inconsistent due to the lack of data standardisation along with sparse ontologies. The increasing use of electronic health records across Western countries, along with standardised cancer classification systems (e.g. WHO, ICD, CAP), staging systems (e.g. TNM, AJCC), and pioneering drug (e.g. DRON PDRO) and side effects (e.g. OAE) ontologies, facilitates data collection. However, clear guidelines for cancer treatment data collection and tools for unified analysis still need to be developed.
```

Reviewer 2: Plenty of acronyms here. Are we sure this is understandable by everyone? I would, by default, ask to spell out acronyms the first time they appear.

### Considerations 

* Do you use human data? You can find more information on the [human data page](human_data).
* Are the required clinical variables related to the treatment available?
* How will clinical variables be integrated with molecular or imaging data?

> * Which resources are available for downloading and analyzing cancer treatment data?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Which resources are available for downloading and analysing cancer treatment data?
```

* Where can you access standard-of-care cancer clinical guidelines?
* How to access cancer treatment data from clinical trials or side effect registries?
* How to propose cancer treatments based on  cancer multi-omics data?

### Solutions

> In order to obtain information about oncological clinical practice guidelines several medical societies provide guidance:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Several medical societies provide guidance on how to obtain information about oncological clinical practice guidelines 
```

* {% tool "icgc-argo" %}: Comprehensive clinical and genomic data for >100,000 patients.
* {% tool "aacr-genie" %}: Cancer genomic dataset.
* {% tool "msk-chord" %}: Molecular and clinical data for cancer treatment analysis.
* {% tool "hmf" %}: Multi-omic data for >7000 patients.
* {% tool "wayfind-r" %}: Real-world clinical/genomic data from patients diagnosed with solid tumours across geographies.
* {% tool "eucaim" %}: Federated platform for Cancer image data.
* {% tool "all-of-us" %}: US-based patient health data.
* {% tool "uk-biobank" %}: UK-based longitudinal study of 500,000 UK individuals; multi-level data across a range of diseases.
* {% tool "cia" %}: Imaging data with metadata.
* {% tool "gdsc" %}): Drug sensitivity data from 1000 cancer cell lines.
* {% tool "ctrp" %}: Genetic and drug sensitivity relationships.

#### Drug and trial public repositories:

* {% tool "nci" %}
* {% tool "ema" %}
* {% tool "clinicaltrials-gov" %}
* {% tool "drugbank" %}
* {% tool "dgidb" %}
* {% tool "drugmap" %}
* {% tool "ttd" %} 
* {% tool "pharmgkb-cancer-pgx" %}
* {% tool "oncokb" %}
* {% tool "sider" %}

> 

Reviewer 2: I am not sure whether it is ok to just add a bunch of tools without providing context or an explanation of sorts.

Reviewer 3: I agree here with Federico that this is something we should prevent. Giving context is one of our sellingpoints

Reviewer: We have similar prudence in Health data page - thats why I allowed it and the heading explain what these are

#### Genomics & multi-omics resources:

* {% tool "mtb-portal" %}: provides a general framework to interpret the functional and predictive relevance of a given list of gene variants in interactive reports.

> * {% tool "pandrugs" %}: a platform to prioritize cancer drug treatments according to individual multi-omics data (SNVs, CNVs and gene expression).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* {% tool "pandrugs" %}: a platform to prioritise cancer drug treatments according to individual multi-omics data (SNVs, CNVs and gene expression).
```

* {% tool "cancer-genome-interpreter" %} flags genomic biomarkers of drug response with clinical relevance.
* {% tool "civic" %}: a free resource to identify the best cancer treatment options based on DNA alterations.
* [Topograph](https://topograph.info/): Therapy-Oriented Precision Oncology Guidelines for Recommending Anti-cancer Pharmaceuticals.

## Monitoring of outcomes during follow-up visits

### Description

The follow-up phase in cancer care is a critical component of comprehensive patient management, ensuring long-term monitoring and well-being of cancer survivors. This stage focuses on assessing treatment outcomes, detecting potential recurrences, managing long-term side effects, and enhancing the overall quality of life. Effective follow-up strategies integrate not only systematic clinical evaluations, which include routine medical visits, imaging exams (e.g. MRI, CT, PET), and biomarker testing (e.g. CEA, PSA, ctDNA), but also patient-reported outcomes (PROs).

> In this context, the increasing adoption of digital health technologies, including wearable devices and mobile health applications, as well as Artificial Intelligence and predictive analytics, has transformed post-treatment monitoring. On one hand, it has enabled real-time remote tracking of health metrics (e.g. physical activity, heart rate, sleep patterns etc), facilitating early detection of potential complications and on the other hand help anticipate complications and tailor follow-up schedules to individual patients' needs. Both scenarios lead to generation of diverse data types. Additionally, cancer registries (CRs) and clinical trial databases play a fundamental role in storing longitudinal data on disease progression, survival rates, and treatment efficacy, allowing researchers to analyze trends, identify recurrence risk factors, and refine personalized follow-up guidelines. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this context, the increasing adoption of digital health technologies, including wearable devices and mobile health applications, as well as Artificial Intelligence and predictive analytics, has transformed post-treatment monitoring. On one hand, it has enabled real-time remote tracking of health metrics (e.g. physical activity, heart rate, sleep patterns, etc.), facilitating early detection of potential complications, and on the other hand, helps anticipate complications and tailor follow-up schedules to individual patients' needs. Both scenarios lead to generation of diverse data types. Additionally, cancer registries (CRs) and clinical trial databases play a fundamental role in storing longitudinal data on disease progression, survival rates, and treatment efficacy, allowing researchers to analyse trends, identify recurrence risk factors, and refine personalised follow-up guidelines. 
```

> However, due to the wide heterogeneity of data types, sources, and healthcare systems achieving seamless interoperability and standardisation of follow-up data, to support individualized patient management and optimize data reuse in cancer research remains a major challenge. In addition, data collection and management at this stage presents other challenges, including: (i) the sensitive nature of the data, requiring strict adherence to regulatory and ethical frameworks, (ii) the lack of consistency and/or quality of patient follow-up information, and (iii) the lack of standardization and inherent subjectivity in survivorship quality-of-life data, influenced by patient perception, reporting methods, and assessment tools. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, due to the wide heterogeneity of data types, sources, and healthcare systems, achieving seamless interoperability and standardisation of follow-up data, to support individualised patient management and optimise data reuse in cancer research remains a major challenge. In addition, data collection and management at this stage presents other challenges, including: (i) the sensitive nature of the data, requiring strict adherence to regulatory and ethical frameworks, (ii) the lack of consistency and/or quality of patient follow-up information, and (iii) the lack of standardisation and inherent subjectivity in survivorship quality-of-life data, influenced by patient perception, reporting methods, and assessment tools. 
```

### Considerations 

Different considerations should be taken into account depending on the type of data being managed:

* Use specific standards and methods to extract and transform data included in the Electronic Health Record (clinical data, diagnoses, demographics, procedures, medications, vital signs, laboratory results). For Considerations towards improved reuse of EHR refer to the section in the Health data page.

> * Considerations for managing  imaging data (and histopathological data),  binary files,as well as the associated metadata can be found in the BioImaging domain page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Considerations for managing  imaging data (and histopathological data),  binary files, as well as the associated metadata, can be found in the BioImaging domain page.
```

Reviewer 2: Add link to the page

> * For human genomic data, established research ethical guidelines and legislations must be followed as described in the Human data page.

Reviewer 2: Add link to the page

> * Since health data falls under the "special category of data" as defined by the GDPR, strict guidelines and considerations must be followed when handling this information covered in the GDPR compliance and Data Sensitivity page of the RDMkit.

Reviewer 2: Add link

> * For PROs, to collect data directly from cancer patients and/or survivors, follow the considerations listed on the health data page. Additionally, since these PROs focus on quality-of-life and are inherently subjective, additional considerations must be addressed:

Reviewer 2: Add link

>   * Are questionnaires designed to minimize ambiguity and ensure that all patients interpret questions in a similar way?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Are questionnaires designed to minimise ambiguity and ensure that all patients interpret questions in a similar way?
```

 
* For data collected from wearable devices and mobile applications, the follow considerations should be taken into account:
  
  * Are the wearable devices and mobile applications validated to provide accurate real-time measurements?
  * How is the data quality ensured, considering potential sensor calibration issues, environmental factors, or user error?
  * Are there mechanisms in place to handle missing or incomplete data, such as when the device is not worn or battery levels are low?
  * How are transient fluctuations in health metrics differentiated from clinically significant changes?
  * Are patient-specific factors incorporated into the analysis to improve data interpretation?
  * Is there a system for aggregating data from multiple devices or platforms to create a comprehensive view of the patient’s health metrics over time?
 
* To address the potential lack of consistency and/or quality in patient follow-up information, particularly over the long term, the following considerations should be taken into account:

  * How will data consistency be maintained if patients change healthcare providers, devices, or platforms over time?

>   * Are there standardized processes in place to ensure that follow-up data from different sources can be seamlessly integrated and compared?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Are there standardised processes in place to ensure that follow-up data from different sources can be seamlessly integrated and compared?
```

  * Is there a plan to handle potential gaps in data, such as missed follow-up appointments or missing reports?
  * What strategies are in place to encourage continuous patient engagement and adherence to follow-up protocols?
  * Are there periodic checks or audits in place to validate data quality and identify potential discrepancies or inconsistencies?

### Solutions

> * To address the challenges associated with the monitoring of outcomes during follow-up visits, the following solutions are proposed:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To address the challenges associated with the monitoring of outcomes during follow-up visits, the following solutions are proposed:
```

* Adopt common data models and standards to ensure consistency and interoperability of clinical data across institutions.
    * Regarding data included in the EHR, for standards that are likely to be present as part of such systems, common data models that can facilitate data sharing, and tools for data integration, refer to the section in the [Health data page](health_data). 
    * Regarding imaging data, for standard (meta)data formats, management platforms, ontologies resources, and image repositories, refer to the [BioImaging page](bioimaging_data).

> * Use cancer-specific standard terminologies, ontologies, and reference databases for coding diagnosis related data (e.g.,{% tool "icd-o-3" %} , {% tool "who-tc" %}, {% tool "tnm" %}), treatment related data (e.g., {% tool "ctrp" %}, {% tool "civic" %}, {% tool "ttd" %}) and follow-up related data (e.g., {% tool "meddra" %}, {% tool "ecog" %}, {% tool "percist" %}).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Use cancer-specific standard terminologies, ontologies, and reference databases for coding diagnosis related data (e.g. {% tool "icd-o-3" %}, {% tool "who-tc" %}, {% tool "tnm" %}), treatment related data (e.g., {% tool "ctrp" %}, {% tool "civic" %}, {% tool "ttd" %}) and follow-up related data (e.g. {% tool "meddra" %}, {% tool "ecog" %}, {% tool "percist" %}).
```

> * Utilize GDPR compliant EDC systems that support capture of PROs (refer to the health data page) and structured formats (e.g., [FHIR QuestionnaireResponse (https://build.fhir.org/questionnaireresponse.html).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Utilise GDPR compliant EDC systems that support capture of PROs (refer to the health data page) and structured formats (e.g. [FHIR QuestionnaireResponse (https://build.fhir.org/questionnaireresponse.html).
```

> * Employ validated and standardized instruments for quality-of-life assessment (e.g., {% tool "eortc-qlq" %}, {% tool "promis" %}) to reduce variability in interpretation and improve comparability. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Employ validated and standardised instruments for quality-of-life assessment (e.g. {% tool "eortc-qlq" %}, {% tool "promis" %}) to reduce variability in interpretation and improve comparability. 
```

> * Use certified, clinically validated devices and apps to ensure data reliability and regulatory compliance (e.g., CE-marked, {% tool "fda-approved-tools" %}). Employ data aggregation platforms (e.g., {% tool "apple-health-kit" %}, {% tool "google-fit" %}, {% tool "open-mhealth" %}) that support cross-device integration and longitudinal monitoring.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Use certified, clinically validated devices and apps to ensure data reliability and regulatory compliance (e.g. CE-marked, {% tool "fda-approved-tools" %}). Employ data aggregation platforms (e.g. {% tool "apple-health-kit" %}, {% tool "google-fit" %}, {% tool "open-mhealth" %}) that support cross-device integration and longitudinal monitoring.
```

* Define clear data governance policies for longitudinal data capture and ensure data traceability.

> * Establish patient engagement protocols to support consistent reporting and minimize data loss over time. Define standardized follow-up templates to optimize data completeness.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Establish patient engagement protocols to support consistent reporting and minimise data loss over time. Define standardised follow-up templates to optimise data completeness.
```
